docs: Document build framework for docs (#32006)
cilium-team/cilium: Documentation/contributing/docs/docsframework.rst

.. only:: not (epub or latex or html)

    WARNING: You are looking at unreleased Cilium documentation.

>     Please use the official rendered version released here:

Reviewer: Use plain, direct language
```suggestion
    Visit the official rendered version at:
```

Author: This one is the default header used in most source files for the docs. I acknowledge your suggestion, but I'll keep the phrasing for consistency with other files. We may want to fix them all at once, at some point (or it's maybe not worth it, because these headers don't matter much as far as I can tell).

Reviewer: That makes sense. My thought process during review:
"Don't we define this header as a global variable? If it's written here, I guess not."

So there's another out of scope idea. 😅

Author: No, this header doesn't show in the HTML version, it's only for the rST files, for readers who somehow end up reading the sources. Which means that if we used a variable to define it, nobody would ever see it.

    https://docs.cilium.io

.. _docs_framework:

***********************
Documentation framework
***********************

This page contains notes on the framework in use for Cilium documentation. Its
objective is to help contributors understand the tools and build process for
the documentation, and to help maintain it.

Alas, this is the sort of document that can quickly get out of date. Please
double-check the information with the codebase for accuracy when you need it,

> and update this page if you find discrepancies.

Reviewer: Use clear, plain language. This is a rare instance when "please" is appropriate. I love "alas" too much to banish it.
```suggestion
Alas, this sort of document goes quickly out of date. When in doubt of accuracy, double-check the codebase to verify information. If you find discrepancies, please update this page.
```

Sphinx
======

Cilium relies on Sphinx to generate its documentation.

Sphinx features
---------------

> Here are some specific Sphinx features in use in Cilium's documentation:

Reviewer: Clarity nit
```suggestion
Here are some specific Sphinx features in Cilium's documentation:
```

- `Tab groups`_

- `OpenAPI`_ documentation generation

- Mark-up languages: reStructuredText (rST) and Markdown (`MyST`_ flavor)

- Substitutions, for example:

  - ``|SCM_WEB|``
  - ``|CHART_VERSION|``

- Multiple versions (for all supported branches, plus two aliases: ``stable``
  and ``latest``)

.. _OpenAPI: https://github.com/sphinx-contrib/openapi
.. _Tab groups: https://github.com/executablebooks/sphinx-tabs/
.. _MyST: https://myst-parser.readthedocs.io

Sphinx version
--------------

The version of Sphinx in use is defined in

> ``Documentation/requirements-min/requirements.txt``. See the :ref:`section on
> requirements <docs_requirements>` for more details.

Reviewer: Order nit
```suggestion
``Documentation/requirements-min/requirements.txt``. For more details, see the :ref:`section on
requirements <docs_requirements>`.
```

Author: I'll change. But can you elaborate, please?

Reviewer: > can you elaborate, please?

Sure. For instructions, I'd like to consistently follow a format of "to accomplish `x`, do `y`". 

It's a consistency issue for how we tell readers to do things, both on other pages (a work in progress) and on this one. Your other instructions on this page follow that format very well, including an example I called out 👇🏻 as good practice.

The style guide for Cilium OSS doesn't currently specify a preference for the aforementioned format. Updating guidance on link formatting sounds like yet another good idea that's out of scope.
`/Documentation/contributing/docs/docsstyle.rst#links`

Auto-generated contents
=======================

> Some contents are automatically generated at build time. The Documentation

Reviewer: I think we can use lower case, no?
```suggestion
Some contents are automatically generated at build time. The documentation
```

Author: Yes, this is a typo. I wrote this doc as a list of brief notes at first, I expanded them today but forgot to remove the capital letter after adding the article.

> ``Makefile`` contains the following target (here simplified), which regenerates

Reviewer: A little more explanation might be helpful here
```suggestion
``Makefile`` contains the following target, shown here in a simplified example, which regenerates
```

  - Runs ``./update-cmdref.sh``
  - Includes running various binaries with ``--cmdref``
  - Generates ``Documentation/cmdref/\*``

- ``update-crdlist``

  - ``make -C ../ generate-crd-docs``
  - Runs ``tools/crdlistgen/main.go``
  - Parses docs to list CRDs
  - Generates ``Documentation/crdlist.rst``

- ``update-helm-values``

  - Generates from ``install/kubernetes``
  - Generates ``Documentation/helm-values.rst``

- ``update-codeowners``

  - ``./update-codeowners.sh``
  - Synchronizes teams description from ``CODEOWNERS``
  - Generates ``Documentation/codeowners.rst``

Other auto-generated contents include:

- OpenAPI reference

  - YAML generated from the ``Makefile`` at the root of the repository
  - Relies on the contents of ``api``, linked as ``Documentation/_api``
  - Processed and included via a dedicated add-on, from
    ``Documentation/api.rst``: ``.. openapi:: ../api/v1/openapi.yaml``

- gRPC API reference

  - Markdown generated from the main ``Makefile`` at the root of the repository
  - Relies on the contents of ``api``, linked as ``Documentation/_api``
  - Included from ``Documentation/grpcapi.rst``

Build system
============

Makefile targets
----------------

> Here are the main ``Makefile`` targets related to documentation, to run from

Reviewer: Comma nit
```suggestion
Here are the main ``Makefile`` targets related to documentation to run from
```

the root of the Cilium repository, as well as some indications on what they
call:

- ``make`` -> ``all: ... postcheck`` -> ``make -C Documentation check``:
  Build Cilium and validate the documentation via the ``postcheck`` target
- ``make -C Documentation html``:
  Render the documentation as HTML
- ``make test-docs`` -> ``make -C Documentation html``:
  Render the documentation as HTML
- ``make -C Documentation live-preview``:
  Build the documentation and start a server for local preview
- ``make render-docs`` -> ``make -C Documentation live-preview``:
  Build the documentation and start a server for local preview

Generating documentation
------------------------

- The ``Makefile`` builds the documentation using the ``docs-builder`` Docker
  image.

- The build includes running ``check-build.sh``. This script:

>   a. Runs the linter (``rstcheck``) by default

Reviewer: Do we need to specify default behavior here?
```suggestion
  a. Runs the linter (``rstcheck``)
```

Author: I can maybe turn this differently, “... unless \`\`SKIP_LINT\`\` is set”

  b. Runs the spell checker
  c. Builds the HTML version of the documentation
  d. Exits with an error if any unexpected warning or error is found

Tweaks and tools
================

See also file ``Documentation/conf.py``.

Spell checker
-------------

We rely on Sphinx's `spell-checker module`_ (considered a "`builder`_" in
Sphinx).

> The spell checker users a list of known exceptions, contained in

Reviewer: spelling and comma nits
```suggestion
The spell checker uses a list of known exceptions contained in
```

> ``Documentation/spelling_wordlist.txt``. Words in that list that are written

Reviewer: clarity nit
```suggestion
``Documentation/spelling_wordlist.txt``. Words in the list that are written
```

with lowercase exclusively, or uppercase exclusively, are case-insensitive

> exceptions for spell-checking. Words with mixed case are case-sensitive. This
> file should remain sorted alphabetically.

Reviewer: Use clear, plain language
```suggestion
exceptions for spell-checking. Words with mixed case are case-sensitive. Keep
this file sorted alphabetically.
```

> To add new entries to the list, run ``Documentation/update-spelling_wordlist.sh``.

Reviewer: Nice "to `x`, do `y`" formatting ✨

> To clean-up obsolete entries, make sure the spell checker reports no issue on
> the current version of the documentation, then remove all entries from the
> file, run the spell checker and re-add all reported exceptions.

Reviewer: Clarity nit
```suggestion
To clean-up obsolete entries, first make sure the spell checker reports no issue on
the current version of the documentation. Then remove all obsolete entries from 
the file, run the spell checker, and re-add all reported exceptions.
```

> We use a custom filter for the spell checker, for spelling ``WireGuard``
> correctly as ``WireGuard``, or ``wireguard`` in some contexts, but never as

Reviewer: Clarity nit
```suggestion
We use a custom filter for the spell checker, for example: spelling ``WireGuard``
correctly as ``WireGuard``, or ``wireguard`` in some contexts, but never as
```

Author: This is not an example, this is the exhaustive behaviour of all this one custom filter we have :smile:

Reviewer: Wow! I withdraw the change. 😅

``Wireguard``. This filter is implemented in
``Documentation/_exts/cilium_spellfilters.py`` and registered in
``Documentation/conf.py``.

.. _spell-checker module: https://github.com/sphinx-contrib/spelling
.. _builder: https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/usage/builders

:spelling:ignore:`rstcheck`
---------------------------

We use `rstcheck`_ to validate the rST formatting. We have a list of warnings

> to ignore (in part because the linter has bugs). The way we call the tool, and

Reviewer: No parenthetical needed
```suggestion
to ignore, in part because the linter has bugs. The way we call the tool, and
```

render-docs``.

See more on this topic on the page about :ref:`testing documentation
<testing-documentation>` page.

Custom Sphinx roles
-------------------

We use several custom roles in the documentation:

- ``git-tree``
- ``github-project``
- ``github-backport``
- ``gh-issue``
- ``prev-docs``

We use these roles to insert links based on specific URL templates, via the
`extlinks`_ extension. They are all configured in ``Documentation/conf.py``.
They should be used wherever relevant, to ensure that the way we link to
different resources remains consistent.

.. _extlinks: https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/usage/extensions/extlinks.html

Custom Sphinx directives
------------------------

We do not implement custom directives as of this writing.

Custom extensions
-----------------

We use custom extensions for Sphinx, implemented under ``Documentation/_exts``.

- One defines the custom filters for the spell checker.
- One patches Sphinx's HTML translator to open all external links in new tabs.

Google Analytics
----------------

The documentation uses Google Analytics to collect metrics. This is configured
in ``Documentation/conf.py``.

Customization
-------------

> Additional elements of customization for Cilium's documentation and defined in
> the main repository include:

Reviewer: Clarity nit
```suggestion
Additional elements of customization for Cilium's documentation are defined in
the main repository:
```

Author: Not all of them are defined in that repository. The theme, in particular, has its own repository.

- Some custom CSS; see also class ``wrapped-table`` in the related CSS file
  ``Documentation/_static/wrapped-table.css``

- A "Copy" button, including a button to copy only commands from console-code
  blocks, implemented in ``Documentation/_static/copybutton.js`` and
  ``Documentation/_static/copybutton.css``

- Custom header and footer definitions, for example to make link to Slack
  target available on all pages

- Warning banner on older branches, telling to check out the latest version
  (these may be handled directly in the ReadTheDocs configuration in the
  future, see also :gh-issue:`29969`)

:spelling:ignore:`Algolia` search engine
----------------------------------------

> - *To be documented.*

Reviewer 2: Is there something custom we do here or is Algolia just crawling the versions we configure in https://github.com/cilium/docsearch-scraper-webhook ?

Author: I have no idea whatsoever how we work with Algolia. This is the reason why this section is empty :innocent:.

Reviewer: Me neither. It's a mystery!

Reviewer 2: If the docs maintainers have no idea the impact on how Algolia impacts the docs contribution workflows then it's probably not necessary to mention here :)

We've at least documented the tool admins [here](https://github.com/cilium/community/blob/main/ADMINS-FOR-CILIUM.md) for Algolia, and if we decide it's useful to add to the docs then we can always do that at a later date.

Author: @joestringer I don't know, I don't quite see the doc introduced in this PR as something that describes the “docs contribution workflows”. In my mind it's more something that describes the current resources that we have and use for building the documentation. The typical target audience would not be someone trying to do a “regular” contributions to the docs (by this, I mean a contribution to docs contents, for example), but more someone who looks into the internals of “what do these components do and how does it all connect together to render the website”. I believe the doc does a decent job at describing the individual components, even if “connecting them together” could likely be improved in future iterations.

As such, I see Algolia as one of these components that we use to build Cilium's docs. It's true that it usually has no impact on contributions, which also explains why I've never been much exposed to it, but to me it still made sense to have it listed in this document, with the hope that someone with more knowledge (maybe myself in the future?) might pick it up and complete it. In the meantime, I could link to https://github.com/cilium/docsearch-scraper-webhook in that subsection, if you think it makes sense. Or I can also remove the section if you think strongly about it.

Author: I linked to the scraper webhook and updated my branch. All other feedback have been addressed, I'll send the PR to the merge queue. Please do let me know if you feel like this deserves a clarification/deletion/... in a follow-up PR.

Reviewer 2: That makes sense to me. From that perspective, having _something_ is better than having nothing at all. The changes you made LGTM. :+1:

Build set up
============

.. _docs_requirements:

Requirements (dependencies)
---------------------------

We have two files for requirements: one where we declare and pin the core
dependencies for the documentation build system, and that we use to generate a
second requirement files that includes all sub-dependencies:

- The base requirements are defined in
  ``Documentation/requirements-min/requirements.txt``.
- By running ``make -C Documentation update-requirements``, we use this file to
  generate ``Documentation/requirements.txt``.

Dependencies defined in ``Documentation/requirements-min/requirements.txt``
should never be updated in ``Documentation/requirements.txt`` directly.
Instead, update the former and regenerate the latter.

These requirements are used to build the ``docs-builder`` Docker image.

> One of the dependency is the custom theme that we use for the documentation.

Reviewer: Clarity
```suggestion
Dependencies include the documentation's custom theme.
```

Docker set-up
-------------

The documentation build system relies on a Docker image, ``docs-builder``, to

> ensure that the build environment is consistent across different systems.

Reviewer: nitty nit nit
```suggestion
ensure the build environment is consistent across different systems.
```

Resources related to this image include ``Documentation/Dockerfile`` and the
requirement files.

Versions of this image are automatically built and published to a registry when
the Dockerfile or the list of dependencies is updated. This is handled in CI
workflow ``.github/workflows/build-images-docs-builder.yaml``.

> The deployment described in this workflow should be run twice on each PR
> updating the Dockerfile or its dependencies, to ensure that the CI picks up an
> updated image.

Reviewer: Let's be clearer to users about what to do
```suggestion
If a PR updates the Dockerfile or its dependencies, run the deployment described
in this workflow twice to ensure that the CI picks up an updated image.
```

Author: OK but not all users can do that, so it will be along “run or have someone run”

ReadTheDocs
-----------

Cilium's documentation is hosted on ReadTheDocs. The main configuration options
are defined in ``Documentation/.readthedocs.yaml``.

> Some options, however, are only configurable from the ReadTheDocs web
> interface. For example, this is the case of:

Reviewer: Different preposition
```suggestion
Some options, however, are only configurable in the ReadTheDocs web
interface. For example:
```

- The location of the configuration file in the repository
- Redirects
- Triggers for deployment

Custom theme
============

> The online documentation uses a custom theme, based on `the ReadTheDocs theme`_

Reviewer: Punctuation nits; is there a Sphinx reason to put the period inside the reference?
```suggestion
The online documentation uses a custom theme based on `the ReadTheDocs theme`_.
```

Author: Missing period is a typo.

This theme is defined in its dedicated repository:

> https://github.com/cilium/sphinx_rtd_theme/.

Reviewer: Is there a Sphinx reason to put the period inside the reference?
```suggestion
https://github.com/cilium/sphinx_rtd_theme/
```

Author: This is not a reference, it's part of the paragraph. There's not formatting on this link, I expect Sphinx to pick it up and turn it into a simple link. The period is to end the sentence.

Reviewer: Sorry, I intended that particular comment for line 334. 👇🏻 I see the logic of ending a sentence with a period. I'd still like to remove the period for the sake of cleanliness, but the URL resolves correctly so I think it's fine.

.. _the ReadTheDocs theme: https://github.com/readthedocs/sphinx_rtd_theme

> Do not use the ``master`` branch of this repository. The commit or branch to

Reviewer: Branch update
```suggestion
Do not work directly in the ``main`` branch of this repository. The commit or branch to
```

Author: No, this is the `master` branch in the `sphinx_rtd_theme` repository. It's not been renamed. We will likely never rename it, because the repo is a fork and the branch mirrors the `master` branch from the upstream repository.

And that branch should not be used at all, even for looking at the contents, because all relevant modifications in our fork are in separate branches.

Reviewer: Ah sorry, good catch.

We have several workflows related to the documentation in CI:

- Documentation workflow:

  - Defined in ``.github/workflows/documentation.yaml``
  - Tests the build, runs the linter, checks the spelling, ensures auto-generated
    contents are up-to-date
  - Runs ``./Documentation/check-builds.sh html`` from the ``docs-builder``
    image

- Netlify preview:

  - Hook defined at Netlify, configured in Netlify's web interface
  - Checks the build
  - Used for previews on Pull Requests, but *not* for deploying the
    documentation
  - Uses a separate Makefile target (``html-netlify``), runs ``check-build.sh``
    with ``SKIP_LINT=1``

- Runtime tests:

  - In the absence of updates to the Dockerfile or documentation dependencies,
    runtime tests are the only workflow that always rebuilds the
    ``docs-builder`` image before generating the docs.

- Image update workflow:

  - Rebuilds the ``docs-builder`` image, pushes it to Quay.io, and updates the image reference with the new one in the documentation workflow
  - Triggers when requirements or ``Documentation/Dockerfile`` are updated
  - Needs approval from one of the ``docs-structure`` team members

Redirects
=========

> Some pages have changed location or name over time. To improve user experience,
> we have a set of redirects in place. These redirects are configured from the
> ReadTheDocs interface. They are a pain to maintain.

Reviewer: Tense nit

> They are a pain to maintain.

🙌🏻 
```suggestion
Some pages change location or name over time. To improve user experience,
we have a set of redirects in place. These redirects are configured from the
ReadTheDocs interface. They are a pain to maintain.
```

> They could perhaps be configured from one of the existing, dedicated Sphinx
> extension instead, but we haven't investigated this in details yet.

Reviewer: Clarity nit
```suggestion
Redirects could possibly be configured from an existing, dedicated Sphinx
extension, but would require research to analyze and implement.
```

Alas, this sort of document goes quickly out of date. When in doubt of
accuracy, double-check the codebase to verify information. If you find
discrepancies, please update this page.

Sphinx
======

Cilium relies on `Sphinx`_ to generate its documentation.

.. _Sphinx: https://www.sphinx-doc.org

Sphinx features
---------------

Here are some specific Sphinx features in Cilium's documentation:

- `Tab groups`_

- `OpenAPI`_ documentation generation

- Mark-up languages: reStructuredText (rST) and Markdown (`MyST`_ flavor)

- Substitutions, for example:

  - ``|SCM_WEB|``
  - ``|CHART_VERSION|``

- Multiple versions (for all supported branches, plus two aliases: ``stable``
  and ``latest``)

.. _OpenAPI: https://github.com/sphinx-contrib/openapi
.. _Tab groups: https://github.com/executablebooks/sphinx-tabs/
.. _MyST: https://myst-parser.readthedocs.io

Sphinx version
--------------

The version of Sphinx in use is defined in
``Documentation/requirements-min/requirements.txt``. For more details, see the
:ref:`section on requirements <docs_requirements>`.

Auto-generated contents
=======================

Some contents are automatically generated at build time. The documentation

> ``Makefile`` contains the following target, shown here in a simplified version,

Reviewer 3: should we just specify the path of the makefile i.e. `./documentation/Makefile` to avoid confusion?

Author: OK, I added it, thank you
